Hi everyone, I'm Ollie and in this new
After Effects tutorial, we're going to
see some motion graphic techniques that
you can use in any of your projects. I'm
sorry for not posting for a while, but
now I'm back with a lot of cool stuff
coming up. Also, a huge thanks to
Epidemic Sound for sponsoring this
tutorial.
[Music]
Okay, the first technique I want to show
you is called snapping, or at least I
call it snapping. I don't know if there
is an official name. Anyway, we can see
snapping as a twist on a match cut. We
all know how a match cut works. You cut
between two different states at the
moment of highest velocity. For example,
we have two circles, black and white.
They shouldn't be able to intertwine
because they are close shape. But let's
see for a moment with a match cut how we
can pull this off.
We set the first position, then we set
the final position. Uh later I show you
how the intertwine effect is done. But
for now, let's focus on the movement.
[Music]
Then right in the middle, I'm going to
set a point of contact and then a point
where they switch positions. After that,
we take the position extremes and pull
our handles so that the center of the
action becomes the highest point of
velocity.
Cool. Now we can see how with the match
cut the impossible intertwining is
solved by a very smooth and fast
movement. With snapping instead we do
kind of the opposite because we want to
emphasize the impossibility of the
action and the weight of the movement.
We want to sell the idea of two objects
not quite fitting together. And to do so
we simply put a little pose in the
middle. So we anticipate the contact
point by a few frames so that we have a
small break in the middle of the
movement. Then we can adjust our curve
to better show that there is a small
impact.
And then the position velocity uh slowly
grows back up.
Other than the position, we also want to
affect the shape. We want to distort it.
We want to push the concept of contact
and friction. So, I'm also going to
animate the path of my two circles,
keeping it as it is, just right before
the contact, and then squashing it.
[Music]
Now, for just a few frames, we can see
our shapes struggling to come together,
but then they snap right through.
Okay, we have our animation, but it
doesn't really feel complete. That's
because a key ingredient is missing, and
I'm talking about sound. We need music,
we need sound effects, and for that, we
have our sponsor, Epidemic Sound.
Epidemic Sound is the best soundtracking
platform for creators. They have a huge
catalog of premium music and sound
effects created by real artists and real
sound designers. So we just look for
sound effects for each movement,
download them and match each sound with
its action inside After Effects. This
will make your animation more real and
more powerful.
Then of course we have music to bring
everything together and Epidemic Sound
has just released a new feature called
adapt which is an incredible AI power
tool that makes it really easy to tweak
a song so that it perfectly fits your
content. Once you have selected the
track, you can open the adapt panel and
instantly change the mood either by
using the suggested buttons or simply
typing what you want.
You can also rearrange the track section
to match your edit, change the length to
whatever you want and even loop it. I
really appreciate Epidemic Sound
approach to AI because it's used to
tweak and not to generate and the artist
is still at the center. So, a huge
thanks to Epidemic Sound for sponsoring
this video. If you never want to worry
about copyright claims and if you want
to try Adapt along with all the music
and sound effects from Epidemic Sound,
click the link in the description and
use the code only to get 30 days free
plus two months at a 50% discount. Now,
let's see how we can intertwine elements
together. If we have a setting like our
light and dark circles and need to
intertwine them,
we could simply duplicate one of them,
bring it forward and create a mask only
on the intersection area.
And that totally would work except that
now you have an extra element on your
timeline that needs to be accounted for.
If you apply effects on it, they will
behave as two different entities. So,
let's just delete the copied layer and
see a better way to do it. Select the
upper layer and apply the effect set
mat. This effect will allow you to
choose another layer as a mat like you
usually do in your timeline.
So, let's select the other circle and
then click on invert.
Okay. And now we want our mat effect to
be applied only in one of the two
overlapping areas. So let's apply a
mask. And then you can go to the effect
properties and click on compositing
options. There you can click on add. And
it will set the mask as the only area in
which the effect is visible. If you've
never used this option, what is
happening is this. Uh I cancel the set M
and use a fill effect so that is more
clear what we are doing.
We apply the mask and then again add the
mask reference in the compositing
option. And as you can see with the fill
color, it lets you apply an effect only
inside or outside your mask without
needing to duplicate the layer. This
effect is great and can be used in a lot
of different contexts. So, let's
mentally save it while I reset the set
M.
[Music]
After the part where the two circles
snap together, I added this other part
of the animation with the two circles
getting back to the starting position.
But for now, I just want to focus on the
transparency effect that you see here.
So to do it, you can just duplicate the
layer of the white circle that is going
to be visible through the black circle
and bring it forward.
Then we need it visible only on the
small over overlapped part. So just
apply a set mat effect with the mask as
we did before.
[Music]
Now that we have only the over
overlapped area visible, I'm going to
apply a simple choke effect to reduce
the area. For now, let's try with 50.
And then also a fast box blur effect.
This one, let's say a 20.
The color seems a bit strong, so I'm
also lowering the opacity.
[Music]
Same process again with the black
circle. Duplicate it and invert the
mate.
Uh let's just copy the choke effect and
the blur on this second layer. And uh
again let's lower the opacity as well.
After that I played around a little bit
with the layer styles and add an inner
glow and an inner shadow to give the two
shapes a bit of depth.
Then I also apply the same effect on the
second part of the animation with the
only difference that uh here the mask
needed to be animated.
I didn't record this part because it was
a bit tedious and more or less the same.
But if you're curious, you can check out
the project file on my download page
where also you will find all the
tutorial files plus some useful stuff
for your motion design project.
Okay, now we have this animation of a
stroke that stretches out and becomes
two different circles. And it's
literally just a stroke controlled by
two nles that get further away from each
other. And then with the match cut, we
get two circles with the path animated
going from flat to full. So how do we
create our gradient split? We apply a
gradient stroke to our stroke and then
position the gradient extremes at the
two ends of the stroke.
[Music]
In the properties, we have the start
position and the end position. And we
could start animating them to make the
effect. But I already know that later
I'm going to apply a null to animate the
rotation of everything. So let's create
one and see what happens.
If we parent the stroke to the null and
then we rotate the n, we can see that
the stroke rotates accordingly, but the
gradient ends stay where they are.
So instead, I want to create two rule
objects to control each of the gradients
and position.
Let's position these new controllers
where we want.
Then we can select only the position
parameters. And then we can parent the
gradient and position to our nodes.
[Music]
As you can see, as almost every time
when you parent only the position
property, it doesn't match. If we
increase the stroke size, you can see
how the gradient is not positioned
correctly. That's because one uses the
composition space as reference while the
other uses the object position as
reference. So we can just remove the
parenting of the position and instead
apply this expression that will maintain
the same position of the NS on the two
ends. Just change the name of the
controlling layer in the expression.
Oops, I forgot to rename this one.
And okay, good. Now the gradients uh
perfectly follows the NS.
Now we can add some very basic position
key frames to the NS so that they move
closer to each other.
We adjust the curves and again this is
also another match cut. So we put full
velocity on the end and we're good.
I'm also going to make visible again the
layer style effects that I applied
before. And here we have our final
animation.
Thanks very much for watching this
tutorial. If you liked it, don't forget
to subscribe to the channel and let me
know in the comments if there is some
topic you would like to see a video
about. A huge thanks again to Epidemic
Sound for sponsoring this video. Don't
forget to check the link in the video
description if you want to test adapt
and all the music and sound effects from
Epidemic Sound. Use the code only to get
30 days free plus 2 months at 50%
discount. and I will see you in the next